Okay. So, welcome to week three. This week, we're going to start talking about statistical models for dependent data. So datasets where the observations are correlated with each other for one reason or another. 
Thus far in this course, we've been talking about regression models for independent observations and this week we're going to start talking about appropriate statistical models for datasets that are generated by study designs that introduce dependencies in the data. 
The first type of models that we're going to talk about are multilevel models. So we're going to talk about what multilevel models are in this lecture and why we fit them in practice. 
So that is an overview. We're going to now start talking about fitting statistical models to dependent data where the observations are correlated due to some feature of the study design. So several observations might be collected at one time point for example, from different sampled clusters of analytic units, so maybe from neighborhoods, or schools, or clinics. 
Observations nested within these clusters may be correlated with each other. People in the same neighborhood for example may share the same attitudes or have similar socioeconomic status or whatever the case may be. 
We could also have the case where several observations are collected over time from the same individuals in a longitudinal study. So, in this case, the repeated measurements collected over time from the same person are likely to be correlated with each other. 
The models that we fit to these types of datasets need to reflect the correlations The models that we were talking about in week two, basically assume that all the observations in our dataset are independent of each other. 
Now we're talking about datasets where these observations might be correlated. We have to make choices when specifying models for these data such that the models fitted reflect these correlations, in the observations. 
So, the first type of models that we're going to talk about are called multilevel models and multilevel models are a general class of statistical models that can be used to model dependent data, where the observations that arise from a randomly sampled cluster maybe correlated with each other. 
In these multilevel models, what makes them unique is that the regression coefficients that we were talking about in previous weeks are allowed to randomly vary across these randomly sampled higher-level clusters. 
So the regression coefficients no longer have to be fixed constants that we're trying to estimate, we can allow those coefficients to randomly vary across these higher-level units and estimate the amount of variability in these coefficients, which for example could describe relationships. So, the coefficients in our models are allowed to randomly vary across these randomly sampled higher-level clusters. 
Let's consider an example of a longitudinal study, where time might be a predictor of some outcome of interests. So we're interested in studying trends in different outcomes over time. We could fit a model where the intercept and the slope in our model are allowed to randomly vary across the randomly sampled subjects that we've included in our study. 
So in other words, each subject in our study could have their own unique intercept and their own unique slope, instead of assuming that everybody follows the same general relationship or the same general pattern. A multilevel models allow us to estimate the variability among subjects or clusters in terms of these coefficients of interest. 
So, in multilevel models, we still estimate regression parameters. These are still regression models. We're still interested in fixed parameters that describe relationships between variables, specifically between predictors and outcome variables but we go above and beyond what we talked about in the previous weeks and we estimate the variability of those coefficients across these clusters that have been randomly sampled at higher levels. 
So in addition to estimating overall relationships, we also estimate parameters that describe the variability of those relationships across these higher-level clusters. So, what this means is that multilevel models allow us to expand the types of inferences that we can make from fitting models to the data. 
So first of all, we can still make inference about the relationships between predictor variables and outcomes, that doesn't change. But on top of that, we can make inferences about how variable the coefficients are in the larger population from which these clusters, for example, schools or clinics, were randomly sampled, that's new. 
Something else that's new about the inferences we can make is that we can try to explain that variability among these higher-level clusters, with cluster level predictor variables. So we can use some feature of those randomly sampled clusters to try to explain that variability in the coefficients. That's another way that we can expand our inference with multilevel models. 
So, let's think about how multilevel models look when we're writing down equations. So a question, what changes allow the coefficients to randomly vary in the models that we're fitting? And the answer to that question is the inclusion of random effects of these higher-level randomly sampled clusters in the model. 
We explicitly include additional effects of these higher-level randomly sampled clusters. So let's think about this level one equation here. We have a dependent variable y which is defined for a given observation i, nested within cluster j. Notice how we write that dependent variable as a function of coefficients but those coefficients have a subscript denoted by j. 
What that means is that those regression coefficients are now determined by what cluster j we're referring to. They randomly vary depending on the cluster j. So we refer these coefficients now as random coefficients, these are not parameters, these are random variables. These variables are allowed to change depending on the cluster. 
